This is talking Drupal,
a weekly chat about web design
development from a group of
people with one thing in common.
We love trouble.
This is Episode 309 media.
Welcome to talking Drupal.
Today we're talking about media
with Adam Globis Honek and Sean Bomart.
Welcome to the show,
joining us again for the second time is Adam.
He was last on episode 179
talking about lightning.
Since then, he's been focusing on
core auto updates, mostly at Aqua.
Since lightning is about to be retired,
he's occasionally or freelance mercenary
from media related work and his free time.
He is a cyclist basis and music producer,
and on triple.org he's known
as Fan of Proxima.
Sean is joining us for the first time.
He is mostly involved in media and
he fixed his issues and other modules
when he sees them for related work.
He's a father of four and he is currently in.
Netherlands we are.
We are the the cheese and the windmills.
A tulips tours that tulips
wooden shoes OK all shebang.
So I'm Nick Lafuente my co-host as usual.
Jump cozy with EPAM with you.
This week the newest thing that happened
to me I was doing some yard work over
the past weekend and weed whacking.
You know, the yard and apparently
weed wacked a bees hive nests.
Whatever you'd like to call
it in the ground and.
I got my first bee sting.
Never been stung by a bee,
made it all the way to 37 and come
check that off my bucket list luckily.
Uh,
it just kinda hurt a little bit and
was annoying for a couple of days,
but other than that I was totally fine.
So I like how Nick added here in the
show notes where I said got stung
by a bee and he added it was Chad
oh OK and danced like a butterfly.
Yes,
I was kind of like ow ow something
and you know I live in the woods so
I was kind of like oh I got like a
pricker or something in my leg and that Nope,
sure enough.
Be just hanging out right there.
So yeah, it was. It was interesting.
Guess you're not allergic?
Yeah, Nope, Nope, I think my grandmother was.
Maybe if I'm remembering correctly.
But yeah, no, I was.
I was fine.
However, I had did find out that a bee sting
can itch for quite a few days afterwards,
and it's best not to scratch it.
Yes, it is it.
All, it never is.
When you really need to never be.
Yeah it's true.
I cut yards when I was a kid and
I ran over a Hornets nest and,
uh,
this was at a property for like
a in Baltimore.
We have like a bunch of Italian
restaurants or whatever,
but this old lady was one of the
owners of one of the time restaurants,
and her cure was to put olive oil on it.
To pull out the Stinger that was
not working, I can't remember.
I'd like to say I'd like to say yes,
it worked, but I I don't know.
It could have been a psychosomatic
effect as as as an Italian myself,
olive or olive oil cures a lot of things,
broken bones,
just a little bit of extra virgin.
Stab, you need just to put some
olive oil and I'd like to inject
here at this point that dumb talking
dribble is not a medical podcast.
We do not offer any medical advice
and should not be taken in such.
Please consult a doctor if you have
any sort of medical conditions.
Also joining us this week for the
second time as guest host is Chad
Hester was new with you this week.
Glad to be here.
As always it's it's always a fun to
talk with everybody and and the guests.
This week we're continuing our obedience
training with our new dog who's probably
making a little bit of noise right below me.
She's learning new commands
every single week really.
So we hand feed her.
We've never fed her from a bowl
so she gets bonded with us.
She gets to trust.
Listen every single time before
she gets a handful of food.
We try to get her to learn
some sort of a command so this
week is about practicing down,
which was actually kind of
challenging and stay is it's
it's a test of patience really,
for for both off center so you go 15 seconds.
If she does that she gets a reward or
30 seconds and I'll go up to about
2 minutes with the with the feeding.
Just because I'm impatient.
I can't deal with it.
And we restarted a document to
keep track of all of the different
commands that she's learned,
and some of the ones that we'd
like to teach her.
We did this with our last dog,
who's just a brilliant dog,
knew about 60 commands.
He passed a few months ago and actually
taught her a little bit before he did,
but he had.
He had a big tumor on his spleen,
so it was about about that time.
But the positive thing is he got
to pass on some of the knowledge
of like how to walk properly and.
How to do certain things so she
started off with about a dozen
commands right off the bat.
Well,
so I remember you sharing that
documentation and instruction manual.
Yep,
I remember that though you said
that I think one of the first
times you on the show.
But I remember just looking
through them be like wow, yeah,
your dogs commands are better documented
than my home automation system.
Like you said, it's a testing patience.
I think sometimes, but it's a.
It's a good way to bond.
Yeah, it's it's fantastic.
I I couldn't recommend it more
for somebody that actually has
the time in the patients and and
and walks like you gotta SAP that
energy before you do training,
otherwise they're going to be all
over the place. And I can imagine.
I mean it's a high energy breed.
Also joining us as I mentioned
for the second time is Adam.
What's new with you this week, I.
Return from Sunny and not frozen at
all Canada where I was up for week.
Visiting my.
You know, visiting my family with me,
my me and my brother and my sister-in-law
and my niece went up there.
We visited my folks and my sister who lives
in Canada and her kids and everything.
And that was all.
I mean, you know it was exhausting.
We hadn't done that like a year and a
half because of, you know the COVID.
And yeah, that was really fun.
Really exhausting.
We went camping.
You know we had a birthday happen.
Bunch of stuff.
Like that and then getting home was fun,
you know. Got to drive down.
Got to take a train and then
just roll into my house.
After walking through the rain for
awhile because we had a tropical storm.
So just yeah just that's
all that's happening.
On the other hand,
I did, you know,
I also thought of what I
want for my next tattoo.
It's going to be around the wrist
and I'm gonna I think I'm gonna have
like 5 the five strings of my base,
you know kind of just wrap around the
wrist at different just five lines
at different different thicknesses.
And,
uh,
I'm just wondering if it's gonna
sound cooler than it's gonna look.
It's probably gonna be hard to do it though.
Doing straight lines pretty it's pretty hard.
Especially on the Minnesota object
around the wrist and they have
to connect up on the other side.
I mean, ideally well,
isn't the goal not to move though,
like I'm not.
I'm not gonna like dancing around
while they're while they're inking me.
Oh no risk.
Going straight round in straight
lines is probably the hardest.
Yeah, I mean, yeah,
take take a sharpie and draw a
line around your wrist five times
and see how close they line up.
Do it.
That's why I pay tattoo artist for,
so we'll see.
It sounds,
so that's interesting that other
that other voice that you heard
is joining us for the first time.
Sean was new with you this week, high?
Yeah, glad to be here.
I actually got a new tattoo recently,
a Drupal tattoo I always like
to Drupal hero stickers.
They were passing out at events
and stuff like that,
and my daughter really loves Batman.
And, uh,
I got this Batman sticker and she
always really loved it and I always
wanted to get a Drupal tattoo.
So then I was like why don't I just
get the the Drupal hero Batman logo.
So yeah,
I got that done and my birthday
was August 3rd.
Recently so,
uh,
I got like six or seven tattoos done
in the on the on the 4th and the
5th. Oh, so uh, yeah I I'm pretty
tatted up I got like my whole back,
done my leg and now I got
my stomach and my chest.
I mean, do you get buy one?
Get one free at some point
where you have like day prices?
You get like discount if you go sit
for eight hours instead of two.
OK, I just didn't know if you get
like a punch card and like after
your phone is free or something.
It's like the car wash down
the street from my house.
Yeah, well,
I I know that I don't really count them,
but I have like 40 or something
tattoos this this may be the most
most tattooed episode of talking
Drupal that we've ever had.
Yeah, I I might up the average of tiny bids.
Lot of getting a functional tattoo
like the conversion between Fahrenheit
Celsius or something like that.
Just the most common temperatures.
So yeah, just just common temperatures,
just watching how things.
Yeah, yeah,
pretty need to convert pounds to oz.
Wait a second hold on OK?
Reminds me of a T shirt I have that like
it's sort of it's printed upside down,
so if you look down at it,
it's right side up and it has
like it's got a lot of like very
common Unix commands on it.
What they do?
So like that's a really so if you have,
you know this would be like a full
chest tattoo and you have to really look
down at yourself in an awkward fashion,
but you could do it like that,
you know.
Exactly, it's totally cheat.
This is my yeah better on your
forearm and then you can just or
like if you do it on your on the
back of your forearm you can just
look down while you're typing and
then you don't have to exactly.
You are saving some Google time QR codes.
Should get a QR code tattoo,
no, that'll age well in about,
you know,
2030 years people are like what
are all those random dots on your arm?
Nick, what's going on with you?
So I was talking to my cousin this
weekend so my cousin I think I may have
mentioned this years ago on the podcast,
but I'm not sure.
My cousin partnered up with somebody a
few years back and wrote a small game for
iOS and ended up getting editors choice.
Editors pick little strategy game.
I think there's a lot of clones out there
now where you have different units,
different costs and and you battle for space.
He finally ported to Android
over the last few months,
and so I've been doing some alpha testing.
For him, for that,
and you know, it's a good game.
I mean, there's there's some quirks.
I mean, it's only it's in.
I guess you'd say it's an indie
developed game, but it's called Warp,
it's I think it's available on iOS full.
And then if any other platform you need
to get an invite, there's a discord.
And I've just been enjoying trying out
this game that I've been hearing about
for five or six years from my cousin.
Finally having another platform that's
available to me and seeing all the
work that you know he's put into it.
It's a passion project for him.
He could have a full time job,
but you know, really,
it's got a lot of it's really quality.
You know it's not one of those side
projects that just you look at,
and you could tell somebody threw together
in a weekend or something they've invested.
Significant amounts of time for it,
so pretty cool to see
something like that out there.
And I mean, if anybody wants to play,
you know my username is the same.
There is is everywhere else. Next fan.
I am already checking the App Store.
Yeah, this looks pretty cool.
Yeah, let's uh, let's not download
it and play until after the show,
but there goes half hardener base.
Closing the podcast app and
downloading another one.
Yeah, so that that's kind of,
you know, I've been kind of looking
at that the last couple days.
Like I said and and been enjoying that.
So we are continuing the trend of modules
of the week again this week though,
I think Chad has the module week Workbench,
email. What do you get?
For that.
Yeah, so uh,
working in Gmail,
so I I think every now and again
will run into websites that need
more than just your default.
Go through and send email directly
through the site sort of thing
so Workbench email allows site
builders administrators to put
together websites and incorporate
email functionality with Workbench.
Put those sort of things through the
different workflows and automation that
you may want to wire up with what it
is that you want to send to people.
So it looks like and I'm just taking
a gander at the page right now.
It looks like it's both 8 and 9
compatible so nice and stable.
Pretty heavily use.
Yeah, it works great with core workflows too,
so you can, you know,
turn on workflows and core and then add
this for some some email functionality
to be able to send out emails based
on switching switching States and whatnot.
So pretty useful.
As I mentioned,
this show is about the
about the media module.
So we asked Adam and Sean
to come and talk about that.
So Shawna I'm I'm curious if you
could kind of give our listeners
kind of state of the Union what is.
What is the current state of
the media module welcome people
expect when they install it.
So the latest we got media library
into core and I think it was 8.7.
It was eight point 88.8.
I'll never forget that period in my life.
It was very stressful period.
But so yeah,
we worked really hard towards getting the
media library enabled with the media module.
And, uh, that took a lot of effort,
and, uh, I think the both of us could
kind of use a break after that.
So so after that,
it's been a little bit quiet on our side.
We do take a look at bugs and triage them
and and try to help wherever we can,
but I don't think there's any really big
features that we are currently working on.
We of course, do want to do more when we can.
But yeah, for what it's worth.
The the media module itself
is working pretty great.
I don't think there's any big issues
with it when you use it in client sites.
The media library I kind of
have the same feeling there.
Of course people always want
to stretch it and do more with
it than it's currently doing,
but besides from big feature requests,
I don't think there's any major
issues with people using that.
As for as far as I know,
I'm not sure if you're.
You have the same, uh, experience, Adam.
I mean listen, I don't build sites anymore.
I haven't build sites in years
and I just I just do back end
coding and stuff like that.
So I I like I have like the least
amount of understanding about how
this stuff is used in the wild,
but I am informed that people do
generally like the media system
as it is like obviously yes.
As you said Sean,
people want to stretch it in other ways
and you know there's things they want to do,
but I think that generally
it's it's well liked.
I don't think anybody I think once you're I,
I would imagine that once.
People turn it on in a Drupal site.
They're not on installing it.
I hope I'm right about that.
I mean,
I think I think our I enjoy media system.
I think it's I think it's useful.
I think it makes sense.
So I I think there was a period
in Drupal 7 where I thought really
long and hard before installing
it 'cause they remember.
It was really hard to back out of.
Especially to upgrade costs,
they sometimes your side just broke.
Yeah, it,
it's going to go out on a limb here and
say it didn't really work great in Drupal 7.
It was kind of kind of clunky,
so you really had to like
you had to work at it,
but in Drupal injure Blade
once came into core.
It seems it seems to work
a lot smoother and like.
Make a lot more sense,
so I think that Drupal 7 experience
is basically the reason why I
got started to be more involved
with how media Andrew put eight.
What's, what was that going to look like?
An getting it into core and was really
something I felt strongly about and
I'm really glad I joined this initiative.
To get it to the point where it is today.
Yeah, working with great people and,
uh, I think the end result is
something to be proud of, so I am.
I think I think that's something that
is worth also acknowledging a lot of
times these initiatives put such a
great Polish on the things that are
very necessary for our Community.
So it's really great to see people
like you join these sort of initiatives
and and work with a big team of
people that have a common goal.
I'm standing on the shoulders of giants.
I guess there's a lot of people that worked
on Drupal 7 stuff that also had ideas
on how to do it better and differently,
and Group 08 was just like a natural
way to get rid of a lot of I don't
know legacy stuff and just start
over and design it from scratch,
and I think the way they did it,
it's pretty awesome and we're,
so I'm getting that from that today.
I'm curious about that process a little bit.
If you could expand so.
I know a lot of this stuff
happens in the issue queue,
but how did those conversations happen?
How did you make decisions on
those kind of architectural level?
Directions when you started really seriously,
getting involved in the Jubilate
port of the media module.
Uhm, is everything in the issue queue
or did you kind of actually have one
on one meetings with people you know?
Where did you record that
information somewhere?
How did you go about deciding
what changes need to happen to
make media core ready when you are
kind of getting started with it?
Yeah, so there basically are
two parts to that question.
So the first part is like how
did the whole architecture come
about for the for Drupal 8?
Well I was not really involved for that part,
I I'm not really sure how
involved you were Adam,
but I know Yonas put a lot of
work into that with the yeah.
Of course a bunch of other people slash RSM.
Uh, it was.
It's a drupal.org name and and I think
he was basically pulling the the
wagon before me and Adam got involved.
I think.
Yeah, that's my experience too.
It's like I was just like,
yeah, I mean he I did.
I had done some some media related
mad science and lightning UM
and then at Drupal Con Dublin,
Giannis was like hey I wanna have a
media Sprint and I definitely want you there.
Like OK, I'll go to Germany for free.
That sounds fun.
UM, and uh, yeah,
that's sort of how I got pulled into it.
It was also the first time I
joined and I I just saw a bunch
of people were gathering in Berlin
and that's relatively close for me.
So I was like, yeah,
I I asked my employer if I could
join and that was basically my first
really involvement in the media
initiative so all the decisions
that were made before that I cannot
really expand a lot on how that came about.
I know there were a couple of
things before I know.
I think there was a Sprint
in New York as well,
where a lot of smart people came
together and thought of stuff.
But after Berlin I think we really
starting to dive into how we are
going to get media entity which
will send a contract module.
Into core and that was something.
Uh, yeah,
I I did help a lot with and that
was a long and hard process.
I'm not really sure how many
comments the actual issue got
before it was added to core.
I think it was over 300 comments.
I got like reviews on 120 things
that need to be fixed and then you
took a couple of days to fix them.
And then there were like 70 more
and then after that there were
60 more and it was like.
A never ending list of things
to fix and refactor,
but uh, it was a a good chance
for me to get more into the to the
details of the module and get to
know this system really well and I.
Really enjoyed spending a lot of
time with that. Yeah, same man.
And uh yeah that issue I lovingly referred
to as Patch Zilla because it was like 3.
It was like 300K and you know
you couldn't open it without it
crashing your browser pretty much.
I was like, OK,
it's time to just commit this because
we cannot continue to iterate in
this issue with this massively.
This massively unwieldy patch like
a a choice of convenience there
for the community at that point.
So I I got it.
I'm not saying the commuters
committed it because it was too big.
I made a pretty sure I didn't.
I may, however,
have RTC did because it was too big.
I can neither confirm nor deny that so,
so I guess for the sake of
our listeners you know.
Obviously I imagine people are listening
to this because they're either lovers
of the show or they're really attracted.
To learn more about the media module,
you know there's there's something there,
but, but let's kind of touch on that.
What are the biggest advantages
of the media module?
I mean I would.
I would say consistency for you know from my.
From my perspective,
consistency is really next
because like the medium module.
Has this this approach of dealing
with all different kinds of media?
That's really, really like it treats.
Everything very the same, which I like.
It's like OK,
A media will always have a thumbnail.
It'll always have like something
else about it,
like an image or like a video on YouTube
or Spotify playlist or something like that.
And it just makes it.
It just wraps up this really.
Just really nice package,
you know and makes it all just very.
Very uhm, yeah, I guess consistent where
I keep coming back to his consistent.
Yeah,
I think from a client perspective
it's it's mostly how I look
at it is that they can, uh,
add more than just files and images.
That's just a like a.
Back in 2019 I was already like,
why can't we just add a YouTube video?
In core it was crazy to me and I
still feel that that's one of the
main advantages that not everything
has to be a file or an image
and also reusable re usability.
So you can use the same media
item in multiple places without
uploading the same image twice
or three times if you need to.
So I think, yeah,
those things that are things
that we make clients happy with.
I think.
So I would definitely agree with
the reuse aspect of it.
I think I think also the field ability,
right?
Like the field ability of of
media entities is pretty powerful
and and kind of allows you to.
Allows you to do more with with
just regular media entities, right?
Yeah, totally agree.
So I think the common use
cases are obviously images,
video, audio, documents.
Are there any more exotic data
structures or use cases that come to
mind for media bichos could be a media.
Where you have like a media thing
that has multiple images or
multiple things attached to it,
that's one one thing I can think of.
Other kinds of remote.
A remote stuff like audio from SoundCloud,
audio from Spotify, tweets, maps,
Google Maps, yeah, totally.
Wow, those that just literally
just blew my mind.
Those two,
those two slideshows and Google Maps.
I'm just like sitting here like.
Yeah, it's really,
really weird to think of the Google
map as media, but when when you?
I actually think of more of media
like an an embedded system so you
can pull in external content.
UM Media can be like like more than
just your basic image and video,
and it's even have like embedded Twitter,
Instagram, stuff like that as well.
Yeah, Yep.
And then you can throw that into
a WYSIWYG because it's already
integrated with media.
Yeah,
that's the beauty of the media system
that when when you start treating
more embeddable stuff as media,
you can just use their same media
library and just have the integration
which editor and stuff like that so.
That really helped and I
also like Marcos Marcos Cano.
He recently built a module to have more.
Things then just there are what
we currently support in core as
media and after discussing with
them a couple of times about this
like even myself thought like WOW
Media can really be even more
than I sometimes think about.
So like,
really anything you can you
can implement it as media and
without it actually feeling weird.
I'm gonna change your mind a little bit.
Take that to the NTH degree here
and ask you what you think.
The biggest mistakes you see
people make with media are.
I have a theory on this and again I can't.
I can't back it up with with actual
evidence or anything, but uhm,
those are the best theories.
Lay it on us conspiracy theories.
Yeah, of course they're awesome.
My theory is that.
I think a lot of people kind of want
to use the media library and therefore
the media system and contexts.
It's not really meant for and I think
that the reason people want to do
that is because the media library
is very easy and it's really nice.
Like we put a lot of work into
making sure it looked good and it
functioned well that it was accessible
and that it actually was like a
good pre packaged UI that would
do exactly what you wanted to do.
And so I think that sometimes people
see that there and we say, well, wait.
The media library only works with
media and they're like, well,
can we make it work with other
stuff you know?
And if we can't make it work
with large stuff,
can we twist media entities into
doing all these things so they'll
work with the media library that
they're not really designed to do?
And I, I think again, that's a theory.
Don't know how many people actually do it,
but like.
That I think I would consider that a
thing that maybe I would advise against.
Do you have a really twisted and messed
up example to support that hypothesis?
'cause I I have no evidence and no examples.
This is just my.
These are the deranged ravings
of a broken brain.
Well, we do see a lot of feature
requests of up asking.
If core could do things more
like entity embeds.
Uh and entity browser?
Uhm, so can we do more?
Can we add more types of Media Inc.
Or can we?
Uhm yeah.
Make the media library support other
entity types and stuff like that and
we specifically said I think in the
in Barcelona we had a Sprint where
we made the decision to make the
core media library very limited or
at least limited in certain areas
to make it easier to land and also.
Keep the architecture simpler,
because if we really wanted to have
something like entity browser in core
which could do anything for anyone
at any time and have plugins here and there,
I don't think we would ever would have
shipped through port 8 with a media library,
and we probably still
wouldn't have one today,
so I think there's a reason.
Contract has been a major success for Drupal,
and there's no real issue as far as
I'm concerned in using contribute.
For advanced use cases and we just
made the decision to be a little
bit more strict on that then
probably other core modules maybe
have done in the past.
Yeah,
I think I think it makes sense you
you cover probably 90 to 95% of
all use cases with what you have.
I mean I would. I would say even audio.
Probably there probably would
have been an argument on whether
or not audio needs to be there.
And I mean most people need remote videos,
actual videos, images and
probably pretty sizable portion.
People need audio too, but beyond that.
Years I. I imagine you're starting
to get to educates like even things
like you're mentioning like. Uhm?
Slideshows like if you look at the number,
the percentage of people
that have slideshows.
On their site as a media entity,
does that make sense to be in core?
An option available to everyone
is something that you can just
build pretty straightforward,
so that that's something that people
maintain the module have to take care of.
Uhm?
Their their UX designers out there
that are screaming at us because we're
suggesting people use slide shows.
Right now I can hear them in my brain.
They're like slideshows,
no slideshows for the hey,
I only mentioned him.
I don't endorse them.
Well, that's that's yes.
Carousels, I remember reportedly,
but slideshows do make
sense if it's you know,
just here's a gallery of images of
when we were at that one events,
like, yeah, there are valid use cases,
but I think we you mentioned
slideshows and in my brain I'm sure.
All of us on this call,
and probably some of the listeners of the
brain starts to wander into areas of like OK,
well,
layout builder can be used with block types
and but what if I had this media library?
I can pick this nice card style and I can
use that in a WYSIWYG and I can do all that.
Then all of a sudden you're replicating
what layout builder does through
the WYSIWYG and the media library,
and you're starting to like really
butchered entire purpose of it.
I actually raises a question for me.
It's so with not to harp on the slide show,
but we're gonna we're gonna do it.
We're here now.
If you were to create a media,
you know a media type that was a slideshow.
Would the idea be that you would upload
multiple images to that media type?
That's how I would.
I would.
I would the way I would envision it
working is that you are uploading multiple
images into one media entity by itself,
and so it's referencing many images
and then it knows how to display that.
Display those images as a slideshow,
right?
We need.
We need a media entity that you upload
a PowerPoint 2 and it separates
into its component slides and makes
a slideshow with transitions.
Isn't that the end game here?
Replacing PowerPoint,
and we've jumped the shark.
I've also seen use cases where we
built the this the slide show as a
paragraph type and the paragraph
represent references multiple media
items to create a slide show.
For example, if your event also has videos,
you can't really have one slide
show media entity because
you can only have file
based media or remote media.
And if you want to have a
YouTube video and two images
and just mix them around, yeah.
Then you have to be more creative
and and then we use something
like paragraphs for example.
As in true Drupal, you know there are
multiple ways to solve one problem.
Yes, a lot. Like the old content
type versus taxonomy sort of
battle that people don't do it.
Chad don't do it down that hole.
We're not going down that road.
I'll leave that on your doorstep.
Alright, so uh to jump sideways a
little bit so media Library was
a fantastic addition to media.
Overall it gave people a lot of
flexibility and choice in terms of what
they can pick from from a library.
So how did you choose scope and why?
Add with shoes.
Yeah, we we had some long and
hard discussions about that.
We had a media library version,
one UM, and there were a lot of well
like things that we want to solve,
but we really didn't really
know how to solve it yet.
So then we decided we should have
an in person Sprint and we got some
really smart people together in
the beautiful city of Barcelona.
And there we had some long and
hard debates on what we should do
and shouldn't do and how to do it.
And it was really helpful to
have core committers there.
People that, UM know a lot about the UX part.
Uh, and then we just came up with some
basic rules for what we wanted and
wanted it to do in one wanted not to do,
and then we got to things like it should
solve the use case for when you just
installed Drupal for the first time.
You have a relatively simple site
with not thousands of media items,
but only a couple of 100, maybe maximum.
You should want to have visual
representations of the media
items you want to have a.
As little steps as possible
to Azure media items,
but you don't mind having an extra
click click if it provides more clarity
and we came up with all kinds of those
rules and then just let that shape
or design a bit and that really helped us.
So we did.
We started with the constraints what what
should it not do and from that came.
Yeah,
what was leftover?
We did basically.
So so is the plan to just really
at this point,
rely on contribute to enhanced features.
So one thing that come.
I see come up or one of the things
I question that when I'm building
a site with media you know a lot of
newer sites need something like focus
on images so that when it's when
the site is generating a preset it
knows which part of the image to focus on.
Uh,
and when you're adding a.
Media item you can't.
You can't use the focus point widget
on an image that you uploaded,
or you can't edit what the focus
point is on an image that you choose.
You have to go through the media or the
file system directly in order to manage that.
Is that something that you know
contribute should be taken care of,
or is that something that you see eventually?
You know Media had taken care
of in core itself.
Pretty sure that works.
Like the focal module,
it works in some situations.
It focal point works with media entities,
but not.
So for example,
if you have a let's just take
a simple blog content type.
You add a media entity. It's an image.
You create a new blog article,
click on Add Media and upload new image.
You can't choose the focus point there.
Or if he's selecting existing image,
you can't choose focus point.
There you need to.
Uhm? Upload image,
save it and then go to the media.
Kind of overview.
Edit It, see the actual image field and
then you can change the focus point there.
Now maybe I misconfigured
something and I just do that same
right about the reuse parts.
It's like when you yeah
and you want to edit it,
that's something we limited.
OK yeah, maybe I misconfigured
something on the upload to,
but I'm I'm curious with
those types of issues.
Are those things that you would
rather than getting in the
weeds on this particular issue,
are those the type of issues
that you would expect,
you know,
contribute effects like maybe the focus
point module or another helper module?
Or is that something that you
would want people to to post
into the media queue for example,
and say hey this isn't working for us,
we'd like it updated at some
point you know where.
Where would you ask listeners,
for example,
to put that type of issue is that
is that contribute is that core?
I would imagine that in the case of
focal points or anything like that,
I would put it in contract.
And the reason I would do that is because.
Core doesn't have any support
for for focal points of images,
it doesn't have that like that would
come and cut entirely from contribute,
so any enhancements there would
also belong and contribute.
Uhm, you know, like the core as you know,
as Sean says,
like the scope of media and core
is intentionally pretty limited.
So the stuff that really should be
filed against core is like basic,
not not necessarily fixes that are basic,
but it's like the problem is basic
is like this will affect at least 80%
of sites out there like some people
are very likely to run into this.
Then you know and if it's a bug like
that especially that goes against I
I would definitely put that against.
Or first, UM, but you know,
mostly good time.
I think it makes more more sense
for core and and Media Media
library in core right?
All of those things to have
a smaller footprint, right?
It makes it,
in my opinion makes it more maintainable,
but also allows for the contribute
space to really, you know, power,
some of the the more advanced
features that you may.
You may be interested in.
Just started curiosity,
you know?
What do you guys seeing as common add
on modules that people are using with media?
Well, not being a sitebuilder,
I feel like Sean Chance or this one.
Oh yeah,
focal point is definitely a thing
then like. A entity browser is still
something that I use for a lot of sites.
When the media library just
doesn't give me enough. Power.
Then, uh, there's also a lot of things
we want to do with responsive images.
And, uh, yeah, getting all the.
How do you say the image API optimized
modules to make sure that all the
images you upload are like getting a
web version an so everything renders
faster and getting like all the
responsive images set up correctly so?
Those are like the main things.
I set up to make it easy to find
media and when it renders it should
be as performant as possible,
so this might be a dumb question.
So brace yourselves,
but what's the main difference
between media library and the the
entity browser like what's the?
Why would?
Why would somebody decide that they
wanted to use entity browser as opposed
to the media library out of the box?
I mean,
entity browser is absolutely a power tool.
Uhm, it's it works.
First of all,
with anything like Media
Library works only with media
is specifically built for that.
And entity browser.
You could browse literally anything.
Because it's it's a lot like views
or reminds me powerfully abuse and
its approach where it's like here.
I'm going to give you like a framework
to just hang a lot of plugins into and
that's sort of what entity browser does.
So like when you get when you start
with entity browser like unless you
are using a module like file browser
or something where it has sort of a
pre packaged entity browser you have
to build that whole entity browser
experience from the ground up.
You know it gives you the tools to do that.
It gives you the API's to do that,
but you have a lot of work to do.
You know media libraries.
Opposite media library.
You install it.
You make a field to use it,
or you create a media field which will
just use it by default and you're done.
It just works, UM,
so I think that's kind of where
the difference is for me anyway.
Yeah,
it's also for your users,
like like if you have a lot of entity
reference fields where you make clients
reference entities not only media
but also nodes and other entity types,
then you want to have a consistent
browser experience and not just.
Use the other media library for media
and then empty browser for other
stuff you want to be consistent.
So that's why when I start using
entity browser I wanted to use it.
Like for every type of reference
you are creating in the site,
so to the end user has a similar interface.
Got it,
got it so and so entity browser
is like a more powerful entity
reference replacement basically.
But you can also use it to in the
WYSIWYG right to embed certain certain
content types or certain entities.
Oh, for sure, you can also have like
advanced adding plugins where you
can just have like a whole drop zones
and stuff like that so you can do
really cool stuff with it, got it.
So you you both kind of mentioned
the big push to core getting into
core and 8.8 UM and the amount of
enormous effort that went into that.
Once you got it into core,
can you talk a little bit about
what has changed since then?
You mentioned that it's a little
bit more maintenance mode,
but was there anything really
surprising to either of you about
having something in core you know?
Do the do the amount of liquid,
the amount of requests explode?
I imagine that say yes, but you know what?
Were there any surprises once you get
into court that you weren't expecting?
I mean, in recent times,
like with cores oembed support,
which really just means You
Tube and Vimeo stuff.
Uhm,
that's turned out like there's a lot
of activity and contribute for that
to like improve it and make it work
with other other remote media types,
not just YouTube and Vimeo.
And that's turned out to be quite
quickly in the sense that that
system there's there's just a
lot of you know remote media is.
Kind of.
It's a little bit of a Wild West like
there's a specification out there
that says this is how it should work,
and that's the specification we're obeying.
But it turns out everybody else is.
Sometimes,
you know,
going a little bit off the
specification and we Drupal core is
currently pretty hostile to that
kind of thing and will just throw
an exception at the drop of a hat.
So that's been a surprise we when we
added that to core to the media system,
we thought that everybody out
there was doing the right thing,
and it turns out that they're not so.
That's been a surprise and interesting,
and trying to make sure that we
we sort of handle that handle that
kind of stuff in a way that doesn't.
That doesn't cause us to bend
over too far backwards,
but also doesn't completely disempower
sites and disempower contribute.
So that's been fun.
So interesting, how about you shown?
Oh, I kind of agree with that.
I think that, uhm,
I didn't really see any surprises
regarding the the media entity itself.
It's basically just another entity
and we have had a couple of those so.
That was not really surprising
for the media library re UM.
Uh,
designed it in a way to have
constraints so people were
going to ask US things that we.
We're not willing to to do yet,
so that was also not really surprising.
And as Adam said,
the Oembed system and now even
I think Facebook and Instagram
require you to have an API key.
Before you can embed stuff that's not
at all in the OEMBED specification.
So if we would have had Facebook
and Instagram embeds in court,
they would have broke a lot of sites,
and those requests would
come immediately to us.
So I think that's also the reason
why we are becoming more hesitant
to add more providers in core,
and that could trip handle those edge cases.
Because yeah, it's a Wild West out there,
and it's really hard to be prepared
for anything but in the end I
still think it's a good decision.
You go for oh in bed and at least try
to use some kind of a specification
or standard that's out there.
Because if you want to do all the
integrations with all the types of media.
A provider's like in a one off solution?
It would have become,
became unmaintainable and uh, yeah,
yeah, there's that didn't see that,
uh, yeah, working for us either way.
So due to its, UM, intentional,
uh, you know, scope, right.
Media has a very specific, specific goal.
Media and media library have
a very specific goal.
They've been added to core
now since that has happened.
Do you feel like media has kind
of lost momentum and and that you
know we may not see as many or?
Or maybe maybe any you know big changes
coming to to the media system in.
Future versions of Drupal.
I mean,
I think you'll see some stuff
happen in future versions.
The reason that currently things are a
little bit in maintenance mode in my opinion,
is because the media initiative,
like the layout initiative,
is not being directly funded at the moment,
so you know it's and like so both
and both of those initiatives
have been folded into the easy
out of the box initiative,
which as far as I know is not
funded currently. So it's like OK.
Who's going to work on who's going
to drive this forward, you know?
And.
The ultimate goal, I think,
is to get both.
You know the media system and
layout builder into standard.
The standard install profile,
and that's what the easy out
of the box initiative is for.
But until it's fully until it's
actually funded with, you know,
a couple of full time people on it.
I I don't see that happening,
so I think I think that I think
it's a goal that's out there and
I think it will eventually happen.
But when I couldn't say 'cause,
I do not control the purse strings.
And if I did,
we'd be fully funded so that now the
halfway answers are nest next question,
which is.
Why isn't media module turned
on by default in Drupal?
Uh,
so are there additional reasons behind
that or or is it really just not yet there?
There are no,
there are additional reasons for it,
so we're we're not.
We're not funded right now.
And that's why we can't solve
some of the major Dragons that we
still have to slay in order to
get media turned on by default.
So like as an example of one of the
bigger issues, media kind of like
the scope of what media can do,
kind of encompasses the existing
file and image fields that we have.
So like assuming, imagine some site
builder wants to go add a new field
you know to put an image in there,
they still see three options if
media is enabled, they'll see file,
image and media with no explanation
about what that means.
And what the distinction is so,
like there is a problem we have to fix.
How do we make that clear?
You know, another issue is like if
people you know people who built sites
using the file and image modules,
how do we migrate them safely
over to media entities without
completely destroying their site?
You know which is always a possibility
with the data migration like that
and you know there's stuff about.
Like does it integrate correctly
with layout builder?
Does it integrate correctly with content
moderation in all the ways that we need to?
Is it, you know?
Uhm, there's an issue where like Barba
about user usage and permissions.
Yeah, yeah.
I was actually just going to get to that,
which is a horrible one.
That was a horrible one though.
That is a horrible.
That's that's still it's.
It's still a problem like where
we are right now.
If you attach an image to a node,
like using a standard image field,
you know under private
storage I don't think that.
Anybody can see that image unless they
could see the node as well and media
because it's an entity reference.
Doesn't you know it it will?
It will show it to you if you
can see the media item you can
see it so you know we have this
access issue like Oh my God.
Entity references don't respect
the entire chain of access here
and that is like I don't even
know how we're going to fix that.
It needs several large brains attacking it.
For you know 10 hours a day
for until it's fixed,
you know,
and these are the kinds of scary things.
There's also like some outstanding
like usability issues,
so some outstanding accessibility issues.
And these are the kinds of things
that blocked from the standard profile.
They need to be fixed if we want
to get it in standard,
so there's a lot of interesting work to do.
Yeah, I'm I'm curious that let's
set the issue of funding aside,
'cause that's obviously you can't
get this done without that funding.
But say you had the funds.
You need how much effort is left to
get to that point where you say this
is ready to be in the standard profile,
is it?
You know?
Six months with two developers.
Is it five years with 10 developers?
I?
I'm just curious the scope
of something like this.
See the reason I'm scared about,
say, about answering that question is
because they don't have said something in
public and now that sounds like a promise.
So am I allowed to disclaimer
that and say this is absolutely be
pulling a number out of hammerspace?
Yes yeah. OK cool.
And for those who don't know,
hammer spaces where Looney Tunes
characters like Paul Hammers out
before they like it young, OK,
I'll just crop the disclaimer out.
So this will be a hard and fast promise.
I will sing old time, yeah, this this
this is not meant in any way to hold you
to any to any deadlines or expectations.
I'm just curious of the scope of the problem.
Like is it something that could be solved in
a few months with a couple of developers?
Or is this something that's going
to take multiple years of effort?
Assuming perfect, Sir.
It wouldn't take multiple years.
I think that if we had like 3
developers working for six months
on this plus you know attention as
needed from the core committer team.
I think we could solve it.
I don't think these are
insurmountable problems. That's that.
That is what I envision being workable.
Honestly, UM again, disclaimer.
I just made that up.
I'm, you know.
Totally guessing,
no idea if that's actually what
it would take,
but that's what I based on past experience.
That's what I would guess.
Yeah, it's helpful.
I think it's helpful for people just to know
the level of effort that sometimes goes into,
because people will say hey,
why not just put in the standard profile?
It's just a check, but you know,
don't you just have to add it to that file,
right?
But there's a lot of stuff that
has to go on behind the scenes.
Get that there and giving
people even just like.
You know,
letting people know that hey,
it's not one person for a
weekend's worth of work.
You know it's multiple developers full time,
four months tells people like hey,
there's a lot of teeth across,
a lot of eyes to dot before this is ready.
A man I wish it was 1 developer with
a weekend because then I would fix it.
I would just be like OK this is the weekend.
I'm putting media in standard now
so this is going to happen yeah but
especially that there are some things
that we don't even know how to solve yet.
That's probably the scariest bit.
And also there's that's the main reason
why I think sometimes there's not a
lot of progress being made because.
Yeah, it it will.
It will take some amazing brains for
more than a night with a bear to fixed it.
What's the?
What's the biggest surprise?
Do you guys working on a problem
like this that like you were
like like that kind of problem?
Like you don't even know how to solve it?
I'm sure there are some issues that
you didn't even realize existed until
you started trying to get something
into core or into the standard profile.
You know what's the kind of
things that need to be considered?
And Adam,
I know you rattle off a bunch of them,
but I'm curious if there's anything
that you were just like, hey?
I didn't even think that that I didn't
even know that this could be a problem,
and now that I know it is
a problem I don't know.
I have no idea how we even solve it,
you know generically.
I imagine with the media system there's
going to be a bunch of stuff like that.
Well, I think that permission issue
is probably one of the nastiest one,
so that also has the most impact.
We already have some reports of that today,
so when you upload a file with a with a node,
it's an it's private.
You can't see it,
but when you upload a file in the media
and you put the media in the nodes,
then the file can be seen because you
can see the media item and media access
is not related to nodes in any way.
And for the media access to
be linked to node access,
we need to somehow track which media
item is in which node and determine.
Uh, what? What to do about that?
So that could mean that if you want
this specific media item to be private,
but somebody else thinks hey,
I want to use this image,
it could somehow open up the access to
that entire media item and it's the
file related to it without the original
person who uploaded it knowing about it.
And these are problems that break
my brain and wife or children.
So I sleep very well at night, but.
This this would be the kind of
thing that could give me up,
like how do we fix this and
how do we approach this?
Is this these are very hard problems?
Interesting 'cause also you might have it.
You know,
in in one context you might want
people to be able to see it,
but in another like one content
type and another you wouldn't.
So yeah, I can see how that would be.
Harry yeah and also like once once
you think about someone said like
should we replace found image?
Well our first reaction was like
no it should exist next to it.
Like if you have a profile picture
that should not be reusable at all.
But then you get into the problem like OK,
you have file,
image and media and when do you choose
what and how do you tell people what
to use and then you think about it more?
It's like yeah,
this confusing.
And how do how do we solve that?
And should we maybe have private media?
Not file image and now media kind
of competing in the same space.
So I guess another architectural
consideration is performance.
How is media's performance and would
somebody kind of be sitting on the
fence between choosing media versus the
native core like file, an image field types?
For performance sake.
I mean, I don't I.
I'm not aware of any grievous
performance issues that media has,
mostly because it's not really doing,
you know,
at those at the levels where
that would really matter.
I don't think media is really
doing anything that's special.
It's like if you're using entity references.
That's essentially what media is
built around, so you know if entity
references have bad performance,
then media would medias performance
would suffer necessarily,
but media itself isn't.
As far as I know, doing anything super.
Super performance intensive like
this until you add that permission.
Check back in and then sites
will grind to a halt.
Yeah, it does mean that you have
an extra entity to load for each
image that you want to show.
So if you want to have like a library for
an event with 200 images of that event,
you not only have to load
the 200 file entities,
but you only also have to
load the 200 media entities.
So if you put a lot of entities on the
same page, you do have some overhead,
but I think.
Uhm, when you look at like generic site
you normally wouldn't put hundreds and
hundreds of media item on the same page,
hopefully challenge.
I would very very strongly
advise against doing that.
I actually I can speak to very briefly.
I actually have a client that has
a gallery for events and so they
they have some really high quality
photography of the events before
COVID and and they put 200 images.
On a node and I ended up having to.
Right, uh,
when the page is saved,
it writes a Jason file with like
the data like the images.
And then that Jason file is read and built.
After load to build,
otherwise the page doesn't load.
There's just too many loads.
It takes like something absurd
like you know 60 seconds to load.
So instead it's just a Jason file
that's easily cashed and then JavaScript
builds the gallery at the bottom
of the page when it when it can.
Yeah, I definitely know it happens.
And also.
People should optimize their images
like use image styles and don't
render a 2000 pixel image when you
only want to show 150 pixels of that.
Those are problems that I see
in the wild all the time,
and people underestimate it.
They're like, yeah,
with the same image like in
the responsive variants like
sometimes you do need a bigger one.
Well,
optimize always.
These are the things that will make
your customers and visitors happy.
I guess with you with all of
that in mind it did.
Does this lead us towards the direction
of potentially replacing the file and
image field entirely with just media?
I know the question has been asked.
Let me put it like that.
We don't have the answer yet, I think.
I would personally like to see it just
because I would like to see a much you know,
consistent user experience for
everybody which is not at all confusing,
but I you know,
I do recognize that like.
Yeah,
it's like replace file and image with
media is a very tall order so I don't.
I don't know how eventually
they're going to coexist.
Why not one idea that I that
I heard once that I liked?
Was, you know, merge file an
image into media and just make
him parts of the media module.
That might be a thing I don't know.
This is this is another one where
it's like very hard problem.
Don't really know how to solve it,
but it needs to be solved in a in
an instance where you have a very
simple site and you just need an image
field in a in a file fields like
those those things make sense right?
And and the overhead of media
isn't necessarily needed.
So then it becomes too like OK.
Drupal core is bloated question right?
How do we you know many different ways?
Two, let's get rid of that or module.
Make room for media module bloat.
Yeah, well yeah, it's it's.
Those are different questions because
you also want like to have a similar
experience for all people using Drupal,
or at least try to have an out of the
box experience for people to use.
So if you do a training video.
Uhm, you showed the same media
library for for your training
video as people just install it.
And it also helps with the adoption.
People just have it easy
working out of the box.
So do not have.
Like in one tutorial you see
immediate library and the other
tutorial you see a file field.
And how do I see the difference
and what what did somebody do
before they started making a video,
you know?
Do you have questions or feedback?
Reach out to us on Twitter at talking Drupal.
You can also reach out in the talking
Drupal Slack channel in Drupal,
Slack and email us at show
at talking drupal.com.
You can get show updates by
signing up for our newsletter at
talking drupal.com/newsletter.
And you can promote your
Drupal camp on talking Drupal.
You learn more about this at talking
Drupal com Slash camp promo.
Thank you patrons for supporting
talking Drupal.
Your support is greatly appreciated.
You can learn more about becoming a
patron at talking drupal.com and choosing
the become a Patreon button in the sidebar.
Thank you gentlemen,
for joining us.
This was a great discussion.
Good to see you again, Adam.
If our listeners had any questions for you,
what would be the best way for
them to get in touch with you?
Uhm, this thing.
I never checked Twitter and I'm
behind a TFA wall where my brother
controls the the TFA codes.
Uhm, I guess you could use.
Yeah, you know it's just dumb and whatever.
I'll log in tweet me.
Fender Proxima is my Twitter handle
and it's also my name on deed auto
so you can use my contact form there.
That's basically it.
Sean, thank you for joining us.
It's great to hear your perspective
on such a key part of AAA.
If our listeners had questions for you,
would be the best way for them
to get in touch.
Uhm yeah, Twitter would be fine.
Sean Blue Mart.
But if you don't know how to spell it,
I'm also into media channel on Slack.
A lot,
so if you have any questions for me there,
uh,
you'll probably see my name pop up
every once in awhile and ask me a
question and I'll be happy to help.
Oh,
I totally freaking forgot about
slack by the way.
Yeah,
I'm in there to media channel on
Drupal Slack then approximately.
Most obvious one,
and I missed it better than Twitter, right?
Probably better or direct.
Yeah,
it's definitely better than
Twitter because I can actually
get the answers wrong in real
time and make a fool of myself.
It's great.
And Chad, if our listeners wanted
tips on how to train their dogs,
would be the best way for. Yeah, I'm.
I'm on a lot of the different channel,
so Chad Hester on drupal.org,
Chad Hester on Drupal, Slack,
Chad K Hester on Twitter.
You can reach out and I'm
certainly happy to have people
be better dog owners out there.
And John, how about you?
You can find me on all the major social
networks and drupal.org at John Picozzi,
and if you're interested in EPAM,
you can find out about EPAM at epam.com.
And you can reach me pretty much everywhere
at Knicks fan and I see exit Vanj.
If you've enjoyed listening,
we've enjoyed talking here next week.
Have a good one everybody. Thanks.